endeavor and I have built out a flourishing field known as
cliodynamics (from Clio, the name of the Greek mythological muse of
history, and dynamics, the science of change). We discovered that
there are important recurring patterns, which can be observed
throughout the sweep of human history over the past ten thousand
years. Remarkably, despite the myriad of differences, complex
human societies, at base and on some abstract level, are organized
according to the same general principles. For skeptics and those
simply curious, I have included a more detailed general account of
cliodynamics in an appendix at the end of this book.
From the beginning, my colleagues and I in this new field focused
on cycles of political integration and disintegration, particularly on
state formation and state collapse. This is the area where our field's
findings are arguably the most robust—and arguably the most
disturbing. It became clear to us through quantitative historical
analysis that complex societies everywhere are affected by recurrent
and, to a certain degree, predictable waves of political instability,
brought about by the same basic set of forces, operating across the
thousands of years of human history. It dawned on me some years
ago that, assuming the pattern held, we were heading into the teeth
of another storm. In 2010, the scientific journal Nature asked
specialists from different fields to look ten years into the future, and I
made this case in clear terms, positing that judging from the pattern
of US history, we were due for another sharp instability spike by the
early 2020s. Sadly, nothing about my model has been disproved in
the intervening years. The book you're reading is my best effort to
explain this model in accessible, which is to say nonmathematical,
terms. It builds on an enormous amount of important work in a variety
of different fields; I make no claims of radical originality. What I will
say is that we should all take heart from the fact that societies have
arrived at this same crossroads before, and though sometimes (even
most of the time) the road has led to great loss of life and societal
